[Music]
so you like to fly well the average
cruising altitude of a commercial
airplane is between thirty one thousand
and thirty eight thousand feet at this
altitude the air becomes thinner as a
result aircraft can travel more easily
and even more importantly burn less fuel
so can't modern planes rise even higher
than that or even fly to space the
answer is a firm nope
hey if you learned something new today
then give this video a like and sorry
what oh there's more okay hold on
there's more but before I get into
details
let me bring home several crucial point
as soon as a large jet takes off from an
airport
the first thing pilots do is take the
plane as high as possible as fast as
they can
few people know that the average
passenger airplane usually reaches its
cruising altitude of six to seven miles
in the first 10 minutes of the flight on
the other hand each airplane has its own
optimum cruising altitude which is based
on its weight and some other
characteristics for example the famous
supersonic passenger airliner Concorde
whose maximum speed was twice as fast as
the speed of sound used to fly way
higher than other modern-day planes at
50,000 to 60,000 feet but it's the
exception rather than the rule anyway by
flying at a height of 35,000 feet planes
managed to avoid bad weather such as
high winds and heavy rains raging in the
lower levels of the atmosphere also such
altitudes allow planes to avoid heavy
airborne traffic such as helicopters and
light aircraft as well as to stay clear
of birds and even big insects and
finally if an emergency happens at a
height of more than 6 miles up in the
air pilots will have more time to get
their ducks in a row and figure out the
best possible solution and now let's get
back to the question why can't common
commercial airliners fly higher than
38,000 feet surprise surprise they
actually can
but in this case serious safety issues
would arise first while flying higher a
plane needs more time to get back to a
safe altitude and during an emergency
like rapid decompression every second
counts
secondly flying at such a great height
aircraft can't communicate with the
ground surfaces as efficiently as at the
usual cruising altitude
besides the higher you get the thinner
the air becomes eventually if a plane
climbs too high up the air gets too thin
to provide enough lift to keep the
Machine up the thing is that the
difference in air pressure creates the
necessary lift and if the altitude is
too high this difference is almost
non-existent
also if a plane rises too high oxygen
becomes too sparse to fuel the engines
and since a plane can suck in less and
less air the higher he climbs at some
point it won't have any more power to
keep rising unfortunately that can lead
to shall we say bad outcome actually
while flying at a lower altitude
airliners can also rely on the
assistance of wind but that high up they
would waste too much fuel to stay aloft
on top of that planes don't fly too high
because of the aircraft's weight itself
the problem is that the more a machine
weighs the more difficult it is to bring
it to a certain altitude on the other
hand there was one aircraft that could
fly way higher than usual commercial
airliners it was NASA's Helios prototype
an ultra lightweight flying wing
aircraft and it reached the
unprecedented height of 18 miles being
able to get to this altitude where the
air is more than 100 times thinner that
at sea level you can imagine how unusual
this partially solar-powered machine was
unfortunately other than this aircraft
no other plane has ever risen this high
above the ground yet besides Helios
wasn't a commercial aircraft with
passengers on board anyway all the
reasons I've mentioned pretty much
answer the second question that's been
bothering me about whether airplanes
could fly into space
apparently nowadays
it's absolutely impossible when an
airplane is fast enough and has big
wings that can support it in the air the
atmosphere does the rest of the work and
holds it aloft as a result the engines
keep moving the plane forward in the air
flows under and over its wings the
clever design of the wings is of great
use as well when the air pushes them
upward it automatically counters the
downward gravitational pull but there's
no air in space no atmosphere no wind
and therefore no airplanes admittedly
there are such things as space planes
these are vehicles that can act like an
airliner in the atmosphere of our planet
and maneuver like a spaceship in the
vacuum of space this feat is possible
because space planes are somewhere in
the middle between space craft and
aircraft you remember the space shuttle
yeah so far all the space planes have
been rocket-powered but when they landed
they had all the features of unpowered
gliders or as the astronauts used to say
it was like a flying brick by the way do
you think there will be commercial
aircraft capable of flying into space
anytime soon
I hear Richard Branson is getting his
vehicle ready right about your opinion
in the comments below but let's return
to our main topic now it's clear why
commercial airliners avoid getting
higher than their established cruising
altitude but why don't helicopters or
small private jets fly at the height of
35,000 feet talking about choppers
they're mostly used for flying short
distances and usually don't rise higher
than 10,000 feet they're physically
unable to get to the cruising altitude
of larger planes because instead of
using wings they move by rotating blades
once the air becomes too thin the rotors
can't support the helicopter in the air
anymore however there are special
turbine engine choppers that can rise as
high as 25,000 feet but they're unlikely
to stay at this altitude for very long
as for small planes most of them have an
engine that resembles the one in your
car as a result it can handle only
relatively short flights at a height of
no more than 15,000 feet on top of that
pilots who bring such planes to higher
altitudes are at a greater risk of
developing hypoxia a condition where the
body tissues don't receive enough oxygen
the problem of small planes is that they
aren't pressurized in the same way
commercial aircraft are as a result when
a private jet climbs too high the level
of oxygen starts to fall fast which can
lead to rapid decompression in any case
modern planes are worlds apart from the
aircraft that flew half a century ago
then airline tickets cost five times
more than they do nowadays but the
atmosphere inside a plane felt more like
some exquisite dinner party and don't
forget large and comfortable armchairs
and sometimes even sofas where
passengers could relax and talk to their
fellow travelers these days such luxury
has been replaced with tiny seats budget
fares and baggage feeds but one thing
remains the same and that's how fast
your plane flies interestingly
modern-day flights in general take
longer because too many airplanes get in
and out of airports creating traffic
jams as a result you need more time to
fly the same route than several decades
ago but what's with the speed the thing
is that back in the 60s planes were
already flying at the most efficient
speed for their engines and since then
the plane engines haven't changed that
much today most commercial airliners are
powered by turbofan engines that work
best at a speed of 400 to 600 miles per
hour so there's no point in moving any
faster than that because in this case
the planes would waste too much fuel and
air travel wouldn't be so cost-effective
anymore surely there are planes that fly
way faster than the average commercial
airliner for example military aircraft
with their turbojet engines can reach
breakneck speeds of more than 1,500
miles per hour
but at the same time while reaching such
speeds they spent a
pounding amounts of fuel the Concord
plane I mentioned earlier in the video
could also accelerate to an incredible
speed of 1,300 miles per hour while
flying at its cruising altitude at the
same time it used almost 47 pounds of
fuel for every mile travel and
accommodated only 100 passengers for
comparison the boeing 787 dreamliner
with a cruising speed of 650 miles per
hour can transport 291 passengers and
uses just 19 pounds of jet fuel per mile
no wonder the Concorde stopped operating
in 2003 this plane was amazing but
economically unprofitable ah the ups and
downs of air travel hey if you learn
something new today then give the video
a like and share it with a friend
and here are some other videos I think
you'll enjoy just click to the left or
the right and remember stay on the
bright side of life